PAS-AGRO-PAS: Agropastoralism
================
Vasco Cadavez & Ursula Gonzales Barron
2024-07-01

## Introduction

Agro-pastoralism is a traditional form of territorial management in
marginal areas of the Mediterranean region that supports food security
and livelihood for thousands of families. It generates employment and
income, and has proven to be an effective land use strategy for
mountains, dry lands, and islands that cover approximately half of the
Euro-Mediterranean region (FAO, 2020).

However, modern agro-pastoralism faces significant unpredictability and
risks, not only from ecological and climate change factors but also from
political, commercial, and administrative stressors. At the production
level, agro-pastoral farms suffer from structural and institutional
deficiencies, including low productivity, high production costs due to
limited feed production, changes in land use, abandonment, population
aging, and inadequate marketing (Nori et al., 2017). These interrelated
problems require solutions that leverage the multifunctionality of
agro-pastoralism and improve productivity, adaptiveness, and
sustainability through a systemic approach.

## Climate Change and Agro-Pastoralism

While climate change poses a serious threat to agro-pastoral systems,
agro-pastoralism itself is a valuable asset in combating climate change.
This is achieved through the implementation of climate-smart
agricultural interventions that enhance resilience and ecological
intensification (Kgosikoma et al., 2018). Despite the challenges,
agro-pastoral products and services, such as organic production,
biodiversity, ecosystem services, landscape and culture, and quality
foods, have become increasingly valued by society. A growing number of
consumers are more attracted to traditional foods from natural systems
than those from intensive production methods. The willingness of
consumers to pay more for quality can offset lower agricultural
productivity (Pardini & Nori, 2011).

## Project Scope

The PAS-AGRO-PAS project addresses “Improving the sustainability of
agro-pastoralism in the Mediterranean Region under climate change” by
tackling current constraints and the effects of climate change using a
systemic approach. The project maximizes the multifunctionality of
agro-pastoralism while enhancing **Productivity**, **Adaptiveness**, and
**Sustainability** to create more resilient and profitable systems.

### Project Scales

1.  **Farm Scale**:
    - **Actions**:
      - Increase productivity and diversification of animals and crops.
      - Improve grazing management.
      - Introduce drought-tolerant forage and crops.
      - Recover degraded pastures by sowing adapted varieties using
        mixtures of biodiverse seeds to stimulate diverse grasses and
        improve nutrient cycling and plant productivity.
      - Enhance soil fertility and crop productivity through efficient
        manure treatment.
      - Protect endangered local breeds.
      - Improve ruminants’ productivity through enhanced reproduction
        and health control, feeding, and nutrition strategies.
    - **Focus**: Environmentally friendly strategies (C, N, overall GHG
      footprint) that build adaptiveness to climate change.
2.  **Regional Scale**:
    - **Actions**:
      - Transmit the implicit value of agro-pastoral products along the
        food chain.
      - Strengthen quality and safety assurance for typical foods.
      - Exploit the marketable “healthy trait” of foods produced with
        environmentally friendly methods.
      - Integrate products into markets and consolidate the identity of
        Mediterranean agro-pastoral communities.
3.  **Global Scale**:
    - **Actions**:
      - Address the current lack of information on agro-pastoralism
        (FAO, 2020) by systematizing available data, literature,
        assessments, research results, models, and web apps. This
        promotes the transition to “Agriculture 4.0” and informs
        evidence-based decisions for agro-pastoralists and policymakers.
      - Build capacities among agro-pastoralists to implement more
        productive, climate-smart, resilient, and profitable systems in
        the Mediterranean.
      - Raise consumer awareness and promote attractive conditions for
        local new generations and migrants.

## Case Studies of Mediterranean Agro-Pastoral Systems

Below is a table (Table 1.1) that outlines the characteristics of the
Mediterranean agro-pastoral production systems to be investigated in the
PAS-AGRO-PAS project:

<!-- Add the table here -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
entry-spacing="0" line-spacing="2">

<div id="ref-FAO2020" class="csl-entry">

FAO. (2020). *<span class="nocase">Item 4.4 - FAO’s work on Rangelands
and Pastoralism, and proposal for an International Year of Rangelands
and Pastoralists (COAG/2020/19)</span>*.
<http://www.fao.org/coag/2020/en/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Kgosikoma2018" class="csl-entry">

Kgosikoma, K. R., Lekot, P. C., & Kgosikoma, O. E. (2018).
Agro-pastoralists’ determinants of adaptation to climate change.
*International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management*,
*10*(3), 488–500.

</div>

<div id="ref-Nori2017" class="csl-entry">

Nori, M., Ragkos, A., & Farinella, D. (2017).
<span class="nocase">Agro-pastoralism as an asset for sustainable
Mediterranean Islands</span>. In K. Jurcevic, L. Kaliterna Lipovcan, &
O. Ramljak (Eds.), *Imagining the mediterranean: Challenges and
perspectives: Vols. Book 1* (pp. 135–147). Vern: Institute of Social
Sciences Ivo Pilar.

</div>

<div id="ref-Pardini2011" class="csl-entry">

Pardini, A., & Nori, M. (2011). Agro-silvo-pastoral systems in italy:
Integration and diversification. *Pastoralism: Research, Policy and
Practice*, *1*, 26. <http://pastoralismjournal.com/content/1/1/26>

</div>

</div>
